---
title: The L-word
---
I once updated my `XING` profile in the `Haves` section, with the tag `"Leading a team"`. For those of you unfamiliar with `XING`, the `Haves` and `Wants` section of a `XING` profile is similar to to the skills section from `Linkedin` albeit minus the endorsements. When I looked the next time at my profile, the autofilling wizard suggested to me that instead of `"Leading"` I could also use `"Zeilendurchschuss"`. 

{% include figure image_path="https://media.giphy.com/media/3o6YglDndxKdCNw7q8/giphy.gif" %}

Turns out that `"Leading"` also has a very special meaning in typography (where it typically refers to the distance between adjacent lines of type). It also resulted in glorious 5 minutes of laugh fest with some of our data science colleagues (who instantly knew what was going on there). 

Anyway, the topic of today is not `"Zeilendurchschuss"`, but I'd like to use the opportunity and talk a bit more about my personal views on leadership especially in the context of leading software engineers.

# You keep using that word
Leadership is a tricky beast. I have a long history of actually hating the word "leadership", because very often the people that tend to use the word the most, are simultaneously the ones that either conflate "leading" with "managing" or even worse are poster children for bad leadership behavior. 

Even though every company these days has its own company values and mission statements, what matters is not what's written on paper, but what happens in day to day business, the behavior you can observe from those in charge when things get messy or stressful. How "leaders" deal with conflicts and impediments, but also the patience, openness, trust and respect they show towards their colleagues and sub-ordinates. You know, all in all the stuff that silently (or not so silently) forms the culture of a team, a department or the whole organization.

TODO:


# I think good leadership can be learned
Three years ago, when I was still primarily working as a Software Architect, a curious thought formed itself: What would happen if I'd apply the same learning and self improvement morale to a management position? Assuming that management is something that can be learned and practiced, as opposed to something that can only be achieved through talent or by a certain personality type. 

That's where I got curious and started to shift focus away from technical books to other sources. Reading everything I could get my hands on that sounded like it could add or lead to more interesting insights. Starting from books about agile that focus a bit more more on the organizational/business side, then going into communication and conflicts, understanding yourself, your own emotions and motivations, coaching individuals, old school management techniques and ending up eventually with books about different highly adaptive forms of organization found outside of the business context (like the military and various team based sport disciplines for example).

> In case you're interested, I keep a list of the books that I found valuable to read on [Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/review/list/6590000-bjoern-rochel?shelf=eng-mgmt)

I also got some invaluable outside help from a friendly soul during one of the larger initiatives I was working on in 2016. He put me out of my (technical) comfort zone and helped me to get some impression on what would await me if I'd followed down the rabbit hole by simply enlisting me to help with topics such as introducing topics such as [Non violent communication](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/5448642-nonviolent-communication), [value workshops](https://management30.com/practice/value-stories/) and openly working with personality types in a team (such as the Big 5, PI or MBTI). Ivan if you're reading this, thank you so much for this. That was tremendously helpful

In retrospect these two things me tremendously when I eventually officially became an engineering manager in my company. I had already figured how I wanted to lead, what I intended to achieve by that and what kind of steps I needed to take in order to make it happen. For me personally it would have been really tough to figure these things out on the go, which often seems to be more or less the standard thing that happens when your promoted. 

# How I lead 
When I'm asked to describe how I lead, I often use an analogy to describe my primary assumptions. All analogies break at some point and become of limited use

- Modern sports team metaphor
  - metaphors are never perfect and they break in more places than people (including myself) are usually aware

  - let's talk about the hard truths about leading
    - Ultimately all mostly matters are (short term) results. 
    - It doesn't matter whether the squad played beautiful to watch football, when it doesn't score and repeatedly looses you're eventually going to be sacked as a head coach or manager
    - Even if you play beautiful, have an overall successful season but fail in the playoffs or finals, there's a high chance that you're going to get sacked
    - On the other hand when you're games are shit to watch, but you keep on winning somehow, maybe even the championship, well you already know the answer.
    - It feels brutal sometimes that all the effort you put into culture, development of people, estabilishing good working relationships, paving the way for mid- to long-term goals, all of this is a second class citizen compared to results.
    - But that's the way it usually is, it's not personal, it's simply business.

  - let's talk about game philosophy
    - have you compared footage of old games 20 years ago with newer football games?
    - difference in speed
    - difference in dynamic of roles
    - difference in necessary adaptability 
    - fast and good decisions require 
      - players with situational awareness
      - an understanding of the overall context
      - the ability to execute without getting the 'ok' from the boss
      - lots and lots of training so that these reactions are followed naturally and automatically

  - the best team wins, not the one with the best players
  
  - being successful for a longer period
    - requires a constant invest in people
    - requires reinventing yourself
    - requires to a certain degree making sure that the success of the team is not coupled to individual people
    - example mourinho

  - Let's talk about managers and head coaches in general
    - past players often attempt to become managers, few are really good at it
    - being a head coach is a significanltly different job
    - the danger of a playing coach
    - but it requires being grounded in that particular sport (have you ever seen a football coach working in basketball?)