I once updated my `XING` profile in the `Haves` section, with the tag `"Leading a team"`. For those of you unfamiliar with `XING`, the `Haves` and `Wants` section of a `XING` profile is similar to to the skills section from `Linkedin` albeit minus the endorsements. When I looked the next time at my profile, the autofilling wizard suggested to me that instead of `"Leading"` I could also use `"Zeilendurchschuss"`. 

{% include figure image_path="https://media.giphy.com/media/3o6YglDndxKdCNw7q8/giphy.gif" %}

Turns out that `"Leading"` also has a very special meaning in typography (where it typically refers to the distance between adjacent lines of type). 

It also resulted in glorious 5 minutes of laugh fest with some of our data science colleagues (who instantly knew what was going on there). Anyway, the topic of today is not `"Zeilendurchschuss"`, but I'd like to use the opportunity and talk a bit more about my personal views on leadership especially in the context of leading software engineers.

# An unwritten sheet of paper
2 and a half years ago I had no idea how to lead, even though I thought I did. Practically what I had been doing then for quite a while was consulting engineering teams, which is arguably not the same as leading them. I do think that I changed my environment for the good wherever I worked and I can also say with confidence that the teams I worked in reached most of their goals and sometimes even managed to push the bar a bit higher. But I was never accountable for a group of people, their personal well-being, their development AND the results they deliver as a group. 

If you ask some of my former managers, some even considered myself unfit for that, stressing the fact that my standards might be too high and would create unnecessary amounts of stress, friction and frustration in teams trying to somehow match my expectations; that I'm an excellent technical guy, but lack the necessary skills with people to be successful on a managerial level.

TODO: continue

I'm pleased to say that this didn't happen and that I nowadays work with folks in my team that push the bar on the engineering side further than I ever managed to do. 

- Unwritten sheet of paper
- Approaching leadership like I had approached engineering before

- Modern sports team metaphor
  - metaphors are never perfect and they break in more places than people (including myself) are usually aware

  - let's talk about the hard truths about leading
    - Ultimately all mostly matters are (short term) results. 
    - It doesn't matter whether the squad played beautiful to watch football, when it doesn't score and repeatedly looses you're eventually going to be sacked as a head coach or manager
    - Even if you play beautiful, have an overall successful season but fail in the playoffs or finals, there's a high chance that you're going to get sacked
    - On the other hand when you're games are shit to watch, but you keep on winning somehow, maybe even the championship, well you already know the answer.
    - It feels brutal sometimes that all the effort you put into culture, development of people, estabilishing good working relationships, paving the way for mid- to long-term goals, all of this is a second class citizen compared to results.
    - But that's the way it usually is, it's not personal, it's simply business.

  - let's talk about game philosophy
    - have you compared footage of old games 20 years ago with newer football games?
    - difference in speed
    - difference in dynamic of roles
    - difference in necessary adaptability 
    - fast and good decisions require 
      - players with situational awareness
      - an understanding of the overall context
      - the ability to execute without getting the 'ok' from the boss
      - lots and lots of training so that these reactions are followed naturally and automatically

  - the best team wins, not the one with the best players
  
  - being successful for a longer period
    - requires a constant invest in people
    - requires reinventing yourself
    - requires to a certain degree making sure that the success of the team is not coupled to individual people
    - example mourinho

  - Let's talk about managers and head coaches in general
    - past players often attempt to become managers, few are really good at it
    - being a head coach is a significanltly different job
    - the danger of a playing coach
    - but it requires being grounded in that particular sport (have you ever seen a football coach working in basketball?)